John, are you on Metal? If not, can make that even faster. Let's see. I would be eternally grateful if the queries at my org only took 100 milliseconds. Yes. So it again, a lot of this is it depends. It depends, right? So like, I'm talking here about an OLTP type workload, right? Transactional, and generally speaking, for those kinds of workloads, you're looking at small, short queries for the vast majority of what you're doing. Very different if you're talking about an OLAP type system where you're doing analytics, where you're doing big scans and aggregations and all that kind of stuff. Even specialized tools for that, like using something like ClickHouse or using Google BigQuery, right? Like specialized analytics databases, you're still going to expect queries to take longer because it's having to scan over very large amounts of data, assuming things aren't like already cached answers. So it depends, but kind of my example here was supposed to be more OLTP-ish. Not yet, but soon. Nice. What would you suggest for using Postgres as a time series database? Interesting. Yeah. So it's not really designed for that out of the box, and I guess it depends on what you mean by time series database, but like there are databases that's like main purpose is to be able to ingest lots of time series data, things like logs or click events, right? Things that basically come in in some ordered sequence and can be nicely compacted, like you're assuming that pattern of access. An OLTP database, again, not including extensions and stuff, but Postgres and MySQL are not necessarily designed for like, hey, everything is coming in in a stream and it's going to always be accessed in the same order that this stream is coming in. But there are databases like ClickHouse that I mentioned earlier that actually take into account like their their data storage system instead of relying on like B trees and heap files and stuff. Their like main storage system is similar to an LSM tree, which is really designed for like time series stuff. So you might be better suited with something like that, although in the Postgres world, there's lots of extensions, and I believe there's a few out there that can actually make Postgres work a lot better for time series too. Nice. Okay, someone had a question earlier about point three on page 30. Hopefully our books are the same. I'm going to look at that real quick before we go to our next thing. Let's see, we got 300 people here. Hi everybody. If you came late, welcome. We're just talking about yeah, for those that came late, let me fresh everybody. We're talking about this book. I read the first two chapters recently, and we're just chatting about interesting stuff that we've learned. Let's see. Okay. Okay. Page 30. Encode job's education contact info as JSON or XML document. Okay. Interesting. Yeah. So if you are have a lot of data, basically this bullet point is talking about like if you have a bunch of information, the example it's using is like a LinkedIn page, like someone's LinkedIn profile. You have the person's information and where they've worked and where they studied school and all that, and so you can treat that like a document in a document database, or you can kind of structure that in a relational schema in a relational database. And it's basically saying you could also just store this as a text column in your relational database, like store the whole JSON or XML or whatever it is, and then query that and you fetch that out and then you parse it and you do stuff with it. I would not recommend that, but obviously there's like some organizations where that's the structure they've chosen. Probably a lot better to at the very least, right? Use a relational database, but use like a JSON column or something. If you if you ideally you have your schema sort of more rigid, where everything that needs to be a distinct value has its own column and tables for doing joins and stuff. But if you really have data that's just like super inconsistent and you need the flexibility, but you also want to be using a relational database, then you probably want a JSON column. Nice. Cool. Hopefully guys are liking it. I see more people joining than leaving, so that's good. All right. Another interesting thing. Let me find the page here. Yeah, yeah. There was that and that. Those are both near each other. So 41 and 43. All right. Let me find the right page here. And I want to talk about. It's actually quite near what we were just talking about before. Yeah, is a little bit more talking about performance specifically and the comparison between a document database and a relational database. And again, some of the information in this book is a little outdated about. I think more so because they're a little bit of a newer phenomenon. It's a little bit more outdated about document databases, things like less limitations these days on joins, but some of the stuff still rings pretty true. And so the part, let's find it here. Yeah, I want to talk about data locality, and this is an interesting little compare and contrast kind of thing. So when you're when you're using something, again, I'll just use like MongoDB as the example. That's not the only document database that exists, but when you're using that, you store things as documents. Generally, just think about it like you have a bunch of JSON entities, right? A JSON documents, and you can store those with some amount of structure in the database. But the example that it was using in the book, like I said before, is like a LinkedIn profile, and it kept using that example. So if you have if you're loading your LinkedIn page, should we go to LinkedIn right now and load it? How do I how do I do that? Where is my browser? LinkedIn. Okay. So you go to LinkedIn, right? And you look at your page or someone's page, whatever. There's a bunch of information that when I landed on this had to get pulled in. So I'm using LinkedIn just because the book used LinkedIn. So you have to pull in some stuff is like media assets that aren't necessarily stored in your relational database, like profile picture and all that, but like name and where you work and I guess you're seeing like profile view stuff, but like where you've worked at before and the description for your jobs and how long you've been there and where you went to school. All this stuff is stored in a database somewhere that has to get fetched and aggregated and then sent to the app servers and then back to the browser, right? In order to be rendered. So what's the like the trade off that it's talking about here is if you had a document database, every user on LinkedIn could have their own document, and in that one document, just kind of like arbitrarily structured JSON. Maybe there's a little bit of structure enforced, but MongoDB doesn't necessarily enforce that every profile has to have the same structure. You could just put everything in there. You could put my name, where my profile image is stored, all the entries for everywhere I went to school, entries for everywhere I've worked for the lengths of times, the job descriptions, awards, all of that kind of stuff. So when you go to load that page, your app server says, look up, you know, Ben Dick and by ID, send that stuff back, and then we load that page, right? And basically one database request, it got either everything or at least like most of what it needed to do the initial render of my page and populate all of my information. Whereas in a relational database, you probably would structure this different. Let's go back over to Excalidraw. Let's draw some stuff. You guys like the drawings? Our drawings, nice. Kind of a newbie streamer, but I know a lot of people like to draw on their streams. Well, let's let's look. So like in a relational model, I'm just going to make up something really quick. You might model the information on LinkedIn as something like this, right? You have. Why is the default color here red? I don't know. Let's go with blue. So you have like a user table, and this is going to have your username, your your email, like your basic user profile stuff. But for something like your like places that you've worked, that's probably a separate table, maybe called like employment. And there is a foreign key that connects users and their ID to rows in this employment table. And every like, okay, Ben works at PlanetScale. That's a row in employment, and then Ben used to work at the University of Arizona. That's another line in employment, right? And then similarly for actually for education, maybe I guess that could all be bundled in one table, but maybe there's another education table where again there's like a foreign key where you can look up by ID, right? Like where people went to school. What's another example from LinkedIn? I don't know. You can talk about like oh, there's like recommendations, as in like one person can recommend another person publicly on their profile, right? So then there's probably users can be associated with recommendations, and actually more than one user can be associated with a recommendation because it's a two way thing, right? So anyway, you start to get these schemas where if you think about this for that one page load to load up my LinkedIn profile, I'm not hitting one single location, like one document that ideally is like all maybe maybe in the same maybe in a single page on disk, or maybe if it does span multiple pages on disk, all hopefully like right next to each other. Whereas this, the user row over here, and then a couple rows from employment, which could be scattered all around, and a couple rows from education, which could be scattered all around, a few recommendations, and then maybe there's an awards table too. People can put in like when they won awards or whatever on there or scholarships, all these kinds of things, right? Like all of these have to be pulled in from different tables, and this could end up being a lot of different separate requests to disk, assuming it's not already all in RAM, right? Like this could be at least one, two, three, four, five different locations on disk that you have to hit, and then maybe more if there's actually spread out stuff throughout the tables, right? So it could be 10 or 15 or 20 or 50 disk I/Os just for loading one page. And if if most of that is cached in RAM, that's not a big deal, but if you have to like hit disk for a lot of those, especially in the cloud environment with where people use lots of EBS volumes and stuff, use PlanetScale, you can use Metal where all that goes a lot faster, but still that's a lot of disk I/Os, right? So that's one of the like kind of arguments here. They're they're trying to be fair and and like have some pros and cons back and forth is basically one advantage you could say about MongoDB is you can grab a single document, do one disk I/O or maybe a couple sequential I/Os and get all that and send it back. And also too, so you know SSDs were obviously a thing back in 2011, 12 when this first was written, but maybe weren't quite as dominant, right? At that point in time, there's still probably a good amount of databases that were powered by spinning disks, and SSDs were somewhat of a newer thing, right? They weren't just like nowadays basically every computer you buy, almost every server you run on is going to be powered by SSDs. So but in the spinning disk era, each individual disk access, if that was a random disk reader, right, was a lot slower. So that was especially important back then. Still important with SSDs, the penalty is a little bit lower because technology has gotten better. But that is like a potential advantage, right? And that's something interesting to think about when when you think about the design of your schemas. I mean, I'm still very much of the opinion that a relational database is still a better fit for this because there's a bunch of other downsides in in this particular example with a document model, and they point some of these out, right? Like if every user, you know, let's say there's I don't know how many employees Microsoft has, 100,000 employees at Microsoft, and let's just say every single one of them has a LinkedIn profile. That means the string Microsoft as an employer has to be stored 100,000 times in everybody's profile, right? In order to load it. Whereas in this one, it depends, right? Like that there could be overlap, but this employment probably then links to a like company table where we don't have to store the string Microsoft in all the 100,000 employees employment rows, but we can store that once over in the Microsoft company entry, and then basically this employment table is just like maybe just two columns basically, right? Like it's a user ID and then it's a company ID, and maybe there's other metadata in there like the person's description of what they did at that company and all that. But there's a lot of schema advantages to like reducing redundancy and enforcing better structure. The the concept of like enforcing your schema when you write data rather than figuring out your schema as you read data is a big advantage of relational databases. So I'm still very much in favor of using a relational database for this example, but I thought that was like an interesting thing to think about, right? And a lot of people that you know maybe aren't necessarily like experts in like databases and and how the I/O and all this kind of stuff works might not think about that, but like the number of I/Os that need to take place to fulfill a query that has a big impact on all this stuff we were talking about before, right? Like minimizing the amount of I/O you do makes a big impact on this right here. Not very many comments right now. A lot of people watching, which I love. Need more comments. Anyway, I like this. I thought it was a cool like discussion of trade offs between those two things. All right. Let's see. There was that that I was going to talk about, and there was I think one other thing that I had on my list. I think I'll skip the parallelization stuff. Yeah. Okay. Maybe we'll look at because I actually can't stay on too much longer. We'll look at one more thing. Go find it in the book here. Page is that. Yeah. Okay. See, somebody asked. I think this is about the example from before. How would the employment table look in case of company name? Oh, in case of custom company name. Okay. So yeah, if you wanted to allow every user to say like, hey, I work at Microsoft via this employment relationship, but you would allow them to customize the name of that employment employment, like maybe some people say just MSFT for Microsoft, some people spell out Microsoft, some say Microsoft Incorporated or whatever it is. You probably in this case would just add another column here that's like custom employment string, and maybe it could be left null if they don't want to customize it, but it's applied if they do. Okay. Yeah, someone was pointing out I mentioned earlier. Oh, we have Michael Scott in the chat. Nice. The way I remember is schema on read versus schema on write. Yeah, it's basically like when not even enforced might not be the right word, but yeah, it's like when is the schema enforced in a relational database? It's predefined and set. There's exceptions if you use JSON columns and all that, but that structure, while sometimes annoying, is generally actually good. Like usually you want that structure to keep things organized and neat and sensible, whereas MongoDB and and other similar document databases let you play looser with that, which has its pros and cons. Okay. Last thing. This was just kind of a nice little summary, right? This chapter two did a lot of comparing and contrasting, right? Relational versus document, the older model of using hierarchical stuff. There's also the they they talk about some other like more specialized things. There's graph databases which have their use cases, right, and other different models. And they were talking about how like they they showed an example using a graph database. I can't remember if that's like over here. Okay. Yeah. I think it was the previous page. They talked about a query which was basically like find all of the people in this graph database that live in the United States but emigrated from Europe, something like that. And using I forget exactly what it's called because I don't think it's Sparkle. I think it was a different syntax. I think it was like the Neo4j syntax, whatever they use. But using graph syntax, you could specify that relationship or that that search in like four lines of of their query language, which is very convenient, right? But then they were also talking about say you tried to model this same sort of graph system with people that can live in certain cities and cities are in certain countries and countries or states and states are in certain countries. If you tried to model that in a relational database, which you can. Like there's lots of relational databases that model people and where they live and who they're related to and all that, but then if you tried to query a very broad thing like every person who currently lives in the United States but at some point in the past lived in Europe, that's kind of a complicated network problem, graph problem, and so they showed over here, like basically the SQL that it would take to do that using CTEs or recursive common table expressions, recursive CTEs, and even with that feature, which at least at the time not every relational database supported, it's like 20 something lines of SQL and it goes up here as well, right? So the point that they're making, basically, is like, hey, you might have your favorite database or query language, whatever the case may be, right? But sometimes it is worth using a new database or new tool if you have a particular kind of problem you need to solve, right? I love using things like MySQL and Postgres. They're very good OLTP databases and they can also serve as general purpose databases. Like pretty much any data set, graph data can be modeled with relational schemas. Document like even these databases support like JSON columns and things like that and you can query and filter on them. They're extremely powerful, but sometimes it makes sense to, in addition to your core Postgres database, MySQL database, choose some additional tool. Like if you have a lot of data that is just by its nature is very graph related and a lot of the questions you want to ask about it have to do with graph traversals and that's how you need to answer the questions. As much as it might be annoying to have to add another piece of tech to your infrastructure, sometimes that's the best thing to make your app as efficient as possible, to make your developers as efficient as possible, is to choose the right tool for the job. Similar to what we were talking about earlier, with what we talked about, like using something like ClickHouse when it comes to like really time series heavy data, like click events or log events or like streaming metric type of data, right? Sometimes, like you can you could use a plugin or something and use it with Postgres or you could just you can do that in Postgres, like it works, but you might be suffering a little bit on the performance side and need to like bump up resources when you could use a tool that's actually better for that job. So, let's see. Harshdeep reposted. Hi Harsh, welcome. Thanks for posting. All right, well, this has been fun. I need to log off soon, but I'll hang around for another minute. Are there any questions? I know some people are seeing this at a delay. I think on YouTube it's delayed like 20 seconds or something. Here's a good question. What point do you start considering other tools beyond your normal set for what you do typically? Well, what I do typically is help other people do things typically because I work in the dev ed space, so what I'm often doing is is either writing, you know, guides for customers, documentation for customers, making videos or meeting with them directly or helping them directly and you know through various channels and stuff. And so often it's not necessarily what I'm doing, but it's about trying to help somebody else. And again, like my opinion, I know you will say I'm biased, but pretty much every application on the internet today needs an OLTP database, right? A database to handle user accounts and metadata and events that take place and all this kind of stuff. And either MySQL or Postgres, those are the two most popular choices, are like the place to start. But sometimes as you start to scale up or as you start to build out more features, you do want to add a Elastic Search for just arbitrary text search if you have lots of documents that you need to like be able to search through, right? Or if you have big like sequential ingestion stuff, maybe you also want to add something like ClickHouse to that. So it's it's like a pairing, right? Like you need to choose the tools that pair well together. Here's an interesting one. Any common misconceptions or misunderstandings you commonly see mid to senior levels get wrong? Interesting. I think my perspective is unique because one interesting thing is when you work, this probably is the case for lots of people, but you work in the databases space and sometimes you work with another company that has like dedicated database administrators and all this and they're extremely knowledgeable, maybe more knowledgeable than I am about how you know internals of MySQL or whatever, right? But sometimes you work with companies that are a little bit smaller. Maybe there's only you know three engineers, five engineers, something like that and they don't even have a dedicated person to focus on databases and that's a lot of the times why they like to have a managed database. But it's interesting because that's kind of something where you can have an incredibly talented engineer, but just because they don't know that much about databases, you have to you have to be able to sort of figure out like what's their level of knowledge and then meet them where they're at and give them the resources that they need. So that's kind of a fun part of what I do. This was fun. Can we do all the chapters? Seems like this went well. So if all goes well, we'll see when I make it through chapter three. Maybe we'll do another one for chapter three. Can we leave this as a rewatchable video, like a reupload? I'll have to see. I think by default it gets left as rewatchable, at least on like Twitter, but it probably does also make sense to chop it up. So we'll see, we'll see. Have I worked with graph databases in production? No, actually, I've never really used significantly. I like played around with them a little, but I've never like used Neo4j or any of those kind of things in production. Okay, so yeah, maybe this is going back to the ORMs discussion. Yeah, good point there. As the only engineer at my org indicated right now, nice, yeah, yeah, keep chugging along. What do you think of application databases like Convex? Convex is awesome. I actually, I will say, I haven't personally built an app with Convex, so I can't actually talk about the specifics of it, but from everything that I've heard from lots of very very smart people and people that are very good at building applications, it's an incredibly powerful tool and a very very good product and a very good way to sort of get a more all in one backend, which maybe at a certain point you don't want, but especially like early on or for small engineering teams, but that want to like scale up quickly, sounds like an amazing tool. Wondering if there's a company out there working with graph databases in prod? Yes, I'm sure there are. It it just like I said, it all depends on what kinds of things you're doing. For example, I actually don't know if they still do. I believe GitHub for a long time was running some form of graph database to power like a lot of their API requests. They have a pretty robust API that you can access for free, which is really cool. And it may not be the case anymore, but I think for a while they were using a graph database to power a lot of those things. Okay, I'm going to wrap up. Thank you for coming, everybody. Appreciated it. Thanks for hanging in. We got to 449. Wow, a lot of viewers. So we'll try and do this again sometime. See you later.